# cpp-and-rust-tools-and-codes
This is nothing, just a bunch of C++ codes to help programming.  
# Projects  
### C++
1. Primitive Duck Type (./dynamictyping) (Under Apache 2.0)  
2. OpenGL Framework (yet to be created) (Under GCC License) (Uses FreeGLUT and GLEW)  
### Rust  
None  
### Tutorials and Blogs  
1. C++(./tutorials/cpp)  
2. OpenGL(./tutorials/opengl)(C++)  
# Personal Vote about C++ and Rust  
### C++  
C++ version commented here about:
Verbose: C++14 + almost everything of C++17 + some of C++20  
To the point: Standard features supported by GCC 9 and Clang 9  
C++ is outstanding. One of the main points I love about it is flexibility. C++ is an object oriented, functional, procedural etc. programming language and it allows for various syntaxes of features such categories of programming language usually support. There are various such features like anonymous functions, templates, goto, classes, enumerations, operator overloading, namespaces and many more, and the list keeps increasing with every standard. Some of these like goto, multiple inheritence, raw pointers, preprocessor defines for constants (now safer with `constexpr`) are criticised for being unsafe, but they too are really useful at some in fact many cases. While a bad programmer may criticise these features and result in bad unsafe code, a good one will always take advantage of them at the right place and get good, clean code. Another feature of C++ is a huge standard library, which supports algorithms, containers, strings, math, console I/O, regular expressions, iterators, dynamic typing and memory management, time, threading and file handling. Things like containers, strings, smart pointers help write C++ code easily while at the same time contributing to memory safety. Another major feature is compatibility with C. A piece of C code can be made compatible with C++ with no changes to it, except in some really few unsafe cases mentioned in the later part of the upcoming sentence. So along with its own benefits, C++ also offers all of of the benefits and features of C except for implicit void pointer conversions, interpretation of string literal as non-const, multiple definitions of global variables, declaration of structure or enumeration in functyion prototype, aggregate array and struct initlisation and variable length array as last member of struct. C++ can also compile C libraries with the `extern "C"` declaration. C++ uses native APIs, usually in the form of cross platform libraries, and OpenGL, Vulkan, OpenCL, OpenMAX etc. to do stuff other than console I/O (graphics, audio, text user interface, networking etc.).  
### Rust  
Rust version commented here about: 1.62.0 Complete  
Rust is excellent. One of the main points I love about it is flexibility. Rust is a mixture of object orientedd, functional, procedural etc. programming languages and it allows for various syntaxes of features having a resemblance with those such categories of programming language usually support. There are various such features like anonymous functions, generics, impl, structs, enumerations, modules and many more, and the list keeps increasing with every version. Some of these like impl, modules, traits are somewhat weird but without them there is no beauty and functionality in Rust. Unlike C++ which uses containers and smart pointers but allows unsafe code by default, Rust forbids unsafe code by default, and uses unsafe block to use them. Rust too has a bunch of algorithms in its standard library, like algorithms, containers, strings, math, console I/O, regular expressions, iterators, dynamic memory management, operator overloading, time, networking, threading and file handling. Another good feature of Rust is its interoperability with C. Though not as good and easy as C++, Rust can interoperate with C with `extern "C"` declaration. C++ uses native APIs, usually in the form of cross platform libraries, and OpenGL, OpenAL Soft etc. to do stuff other than console I/O (graphics, audio etc.).  
