# 1. SFML  
Current Version: 2.5  
License: zlib, Freetype (FreeType), public doman (libjpeg and stb_image), LGPL (OpenAL Soft), BSD (libogg, libvorbis and libflac)  
SFML is a C++ library for creating hardware accelerated 2d graphics, OpenGL and multimedia based applications. In all, it is a library which makes excellent use of every good C++ feature. Another thing is that the graphics and terminal can run as two separate processes (at least on Linux). Also, SFMLIt also has a really amazing documentation, and dozens of tutorials are made on it, including its official one. But there is one flaw I noticed, though it is possibly under development for the 2.6 of it, and that flaw is unicode support. I tried to print some chess piece emojis and CJK glyphs, but falied even with unicode based fonts. But later I realised that it lacks unicode support. I hope this is added in the close future.

# 2. SDL
Current Version: 2.0  
License: zlib, LGPL (<= 1.2)  
SDL is a C library (and is also used with C++) for creating 2d graphics (both system rendered and hardware accelerated), OpenGL and graphics based multimedia applications. In all it is a very reliable library and supports unicode. It supports both software and hardware based rendering. It has a font and image loading library, capable of even loading unicode, though both of them need to be installed separately. One flaw of it is that the quality of documentation did not seem to be that good. It is reliable, but very technical, and examples are given for no single function. It has dozens of tutorials, though. Another flaw is lack of graphics primitives. This is a good challenge for a curious programmer, like me, though. Also, it is also a good library for developing high level graphics frameworks like game engines. But it should be used with another libraries for audio, networking etc., since this library has only graphics based utilities.
