# Tutorial 1: Window Creation  

## OpenGL Overview  

OpenGL is a programming library for 2D and 3D graphics. Despite originally being written for C (and later both C and C++), it is now available in many programming languages like Java(JOGL), Python(PyOpenGL) and HTML-JavaScript(WebGL)(OpenGL ES), which have similar functions.  But here C++ will be the programming language of focus. How the OpenGL renders things and concepts like the graphics pipeline will be shown along the way.  

## Tutorial Prerequisites  

For this tutorial you require:-  
1. FreeGLUT (for window creation)  
2. GLEW (for loading OpenGL functions)  
3. C++ Compiler (GCC(for Linux and Mac, for Windows use MinGW, MinGW-w64 or Cygwin), MSVC, Clang etc. unless and until you know how to compile and link with it, better if the compiler at least supports C++11)  
4. Math: Math library is no longer required. I could finally learn matrices from Etay Meiri's videos, though yes, I have to learn orthographic projection and view matrices.  
5. Good knowledge of C17 and C++17 (Note: I am a user of so-called unsafe code like goto or raw pointers(I don't use such code most of the time though), and take a good advantage of C++17(along with a few restricted set of features from C++20)(except for maybe STL iterators))  
6. Adequate knowledge of how compilers, linkers, libraries, headers etc. work in C++  
7. Platform: Any platform is okay, but usually those which have a greater community are recommended, like Windows or Ubuntu. (Note for MacOS users: OpenGL is deprecated on MacOS starting from MacOS Mojave.).  
8. Graphics card: Any graphics card which supports a OpenGL 4.1 (which most modern ones do, including Intel ones)  

## Creating a Window  

OpenGL, sadly, does not provide any function for window creation. So you need libraries like GLFW or FreeGLUT to do it. It can be done manually, but it is just a huge chaos, waste of time and platform specific APIs.  

Which one out of the two is up to you. FreeGLUT gives a variety of features for window creation, and even to some extent, mesh, font and image rendering and can be used easily for simple graphics. GLFW gives very advanced features for window creation, and the older versions also gave support for image processing, multithreading (now almost useless because of `std::thread`), and can be used for complex applications. These complex features can be achieved using FreeGLUT, but it is more straightforward with GLFW. FreeGLUT's advantage over GLFW is that it is a way simpler and more versatile for easy and intermediate features, it uses multithreading-like features (don't know whether it uses multithreading, but at least it seems to use) with callbacks, it has a greater support than GLFW for GUI and it has inbuilt support for basic rendering and has other such utilities. FreeGLUT comes under MIT license while GLFW comes under zlib license, and both the licenses are permissive. Also, there are a plenty other APIs for this like OpenGLUT (based on FreeGLUT), SDL, SFML, Qt (not recommended due to restrictive license, and paid for commercial use), wxWidgets for window creation.  

### Important Links to Documentation  
[GLUT Docs](https://www.opengl.org/resources/libraries/glut/spec3/spec3.html)  
[FreeGLUT Docs](http://freeglut.sourceforge.net/docs/api.php) Note: You may have to refer GLUT docs for GLUT functions the uses of which are unchanged in FreeGLUT.  
<!-- [OpenGLUT Docs](http://openglut.sourceforge.net/group__api.html)  
[GLFW Docs](https://www.glfw.org/docs/latest/)
Since these are not ecessary for this tutorial, commenting them out -->

## Loading OpenGL Functions  

OpenGL, again sadly, is not fully supported by default, at least on Windows. At least on Windows, it does not support any greater version than 1.1, which is never recommended to be used, unless the application dates too old. So you need a loading library to get the functions and facilities from later and more recent versions of OpenGL. There are many libraries for this purpose. There comes GLEW, which is very popular, and GLAD, which is equally popular, and also others like GL Load, GL3W (only for core contexts) and so on.  

## First Application  

Just type the following code to create an OpenGL context with FreeGLUT or GLFW and load OpenGL functions.  

FreeGLUT:  

```c++
// OpenGL
#include <GL/glew.h> // Modern OpenGL with GLEW
// Don't forget glew.h is to be included before any other OpenGL header, else it will give a bunch of headers while initialising.
#include <GL/gl.h> // Legacy OpenGL
#include <GL/glext.h> // OpenGL Extensions
// FreeGLUT
#include <GL/glut.h>
#include <GL/freeglut.h>
// Standard Libraries
#include <iostream> // for "std::cout" and "std::endl", will be required to display error messages
#include <string> // for the commonly used "std::string" class, which is much better than C-style "char*" or "const char*", will be required to store shaders etc.

void init() {}

void draw() {
  glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT | GL_DEPTH_BUFFER_BIT); // clear the window's color and depth buffers (color and depth buffers both will be needed later on)
  // code
  glutSwapBuffers(); // for a double buffered window, there is a need to swap the front and back buffers
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
  glutInit(&argc, argv); // initialise FreeGLUT
  glutInitDisplayMode(GLUT_RGB | GLUT_DEPTH | GLUT_DOUBLE); // set up a double buffered rgb based window layout
  glutInitContextVersion(4, 1); // [[optional]] set context version to OpenGL 4.1
  glutInitContextProfile(GLUT_CORE_PROFILE); // for core profile

  glutInitWindowSize(width, height); // set your own width and height - both are int
  glutInitWindowPosition(x, y); // [[strictly optional]] set your own x and y coordinates
  int windowID = glutCreateWindow(title); // set your own title - char*
  glewExperimental = GL_TRUE; // useless if not using extensions
  glewInit(); // initialise GLEW
  init(); // initialiser function we have defined on top
  glutDisplayFunc(draw); // void(*)() callback to be displayed on window
  glutMainLoop(); // FreeGLUT event loop
  return 0; // don't worry the program won't stop until the window is closed
}
```  
## Installing, Compiling and Linking  
### Installing  
For a general idea use [this](http://titan.csit.rmit.edu.au/~e20068/teaching/i3dg&a/2016/compiling.html).  
For MSVC just install the package straightaway from website. After installing link the `.lib` files (and `.dll` for dynamic linking) which come with installation.  
For MinGW32 use the steps written [here](https://medium.com/@bhargav.chippada/how-to-setup-opengl-on-mingw-w64-in-windows-10-64-bits-b77f350cea7e)(it is a very good article, and it explains neatly)(it is very long, and so not explaining here).  
For MinGW64 through MSYS2, just install the packages for FreeGLUT and GLEW through `pacman` in MSYS2 bash terminal. Use `-Ss` to search their names and `-S` to install them.  
For Cygwin use the steps written [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/14346) (it can help beginners, but not sure whether it means GLUT or FreeGLUT).  
For Linux(especially Ubuntu and Fedora) [this](http://www.cse.iitm.ac.in/~vplab/courses/CG/opengl_start.html) may be helpful, or maybe even [this discussion](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/859501/learning-opengl-in-ubuntu)(especially Ubuntu).  
[This question](https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-set-up-OpenGL-on-a-Mac) may be helpful for Mac users, and [this discussion](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/65802625/develop-using-opengl-4-x-on-osx-big-sur) for anybody developing for app store.  
### Compiling and Linking  
For compiling, use the same way as the specific compiler needs.  
For GCC based compilers, add `-lglew32 -lopengl32 -lfreeglut -lglu32` for dynamic linking and `-static -lglew32 -lfreeglut_static -lopengl32 -lgdi32 -lwinmm -lglu32` for static linking on Windows, and `-lglut -lGL -lGLU -lGLEW` on Linux (a better guide is there in the "Installing" section).  
For MSVC specify the static libraries (and dynamic libraries if needed) in the linker.
## Tutorial References (will be written on this first page only)  
1. Various other OpenGL tutorials like the tutorials mentioned in OpenGLBook.com, TheCherno's tutorials etc.  
2. OpenGL documentation  
3. OpenGL Red Book (available on archive.org and is free to download)  
