# C++ Tutorial  
## What is C++  
C++ is an object oriented and procedural programming language. Some of its common aspects are:  
1. Great level of flexibility and features: C++ is very flexible, and can work at a very low level as well as a very high level, which is why it is commonly used along with C in building operating system kernels. Also, modern versions of C++ have improved it a lot, with additional features like anonymous functions, multithreading, regular expressions, various improvements in standard template library, partial support for dynamic typing, partial support for garbage collection and so on. C++ is directly compiled to native binary code, and so it adds to security of the application (binary executables are more difficult to reverse engineer), and also performance. It can also use static(`.o` or `.a`, and `.lib`) and dynamic(`.so` and `.dll`) libraries which are there in binary format.
2. Compatibility with C: C++ is highly compatible with C and so many libraries built for C also work with C++ with very less or sometimes no change in source code.  
3. Huge community: C++ has a huge community and therefore has many libraries to help programming in it, common ones of them licensed under less restrictive (either permissive or weak copyleft) licenses may be Boost for general purpose utility, SFML and Allegro for 2D graphics and multimedia, Godot, Irrlicht and Ogre for 3D graphics, wxWidgets and GTKmm for GUI, OpenAL soft for Audio files, Bullet for physics, GLM for mathematics, Magick++ and STB for image loading, OpenGL and Vulkan for hardware accelerated graphics and GLFW and FreeGLUT for OpenGL window creation.  
4. Interoperability with Python and Java: Java is made in C++, and can be used with C++ through Java Native Interface, and Python is written in C, but it can be used with C++ also, through libraries like `pythonXY.lib`, `_tkinter.lib` etc. and headers like `python.h` which come with the installation. Python also has Cython and modules like `ctypes` which help integrate C++ and Python.  
## Requirements for this Tutorial  
* GCC-Based Compiler which supports at least most of the features of C++17: The steps are not written here since there will be different steps required for different platforms. GCC is inbuilt in Linux with C++. For Windows, MinGW32, MinGW64 or Cygwin or Cygwin32 is available. For MinGW32, there is a direct install from sourceforge. For MinGW64, either directly download the build from MinGW-w64 sourceforge (not recommended, since it gives an older version of GCC), or download MSYS2 and use `pacman` to download MinGW-w64 MinGW64. GCC is also available on MacOS, through some possibly tedious way.  
* Text editor: Sublime Text, BlueFish or VSCode is good.  
* No IDE is required for this tutorial. Text editors like Sublime Text and VSCode and maybe BlueFish have many useful features of IDEs.  
## Hello World  
First let us see the program.  
```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
  std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```  
* The first line here is `#include <iostream>`. `iostream` is a standard library header file located in the C++ include directory of the compiler, which is why it is covered in angular brackets. It contains functions and macros for console I/O. `#include` is a preprocessor directive (to be explained in some later tutorial), which copies the contents of that file into the program, in this case, all the functions, variables, classes, macros etc. located in `iostream` header.  
* `int main()` is the function to be executed when the program runs.  
* `std::cout` is the `std::ostream` object in `iostream` used for displaying output in the console. `<<` is the operator used to write to a `std::ostream`. Various types of `std::ostream`s will be seen is some later tutorial. `std::endl` is a newline character, just like `\n`. They both have a slight difference, but for now it won't matter.  
* `std` is the namespace in which most of the standard library commands exist. To access them we use the scope resolution operator `::`, which is similar to `.` in C# (have no experience with it, but have read it), when used to access namespaces. A `using namespace std;` declaration can also be put at the top, but it is not recommended.  
* `return 0` is the value the function returns. This won't matter much, at least for now.  
## Run the Program  
Let your name of the program be `filename.cpp`, and let the target file name be `executable`. Then to compile, type this in your terminal.  
```bat
g++ filename.cpp -o executable
```  
If executable name is not specified, like typing only `g++ filename.cpp`, then the resulting executable will be named `a.out` on Linux and `a.exe` on Wihdows. To run this file, type the first command on powershell-style terminal and second one on bash style terminal.  
```bat
executable
```  
```bat
./executable
```  
