# C++ Data Types  
## Introduction  
In a programming language, there are variables, which are bits of memory used to store data. Each of the variable is of a specific type, and is called a data type. These tell the compiler(interpreter in case of Python, Ruby etc.) how to read the data.  
## Variables  
A variable is reserved memory space for some value, and the type of it, and the memory address (pointer see Derived Data Types) of it defines how it is read. A variable has to be declared. A variable is to be be assigned to have values stored in it, with the assignment operator in C++ (more detail of operators later). It is up to the developer if the value is to be assigned while declaration, or declare and separately. Its value can be modified unless specified `const`. We process the values and display output using those values. A variable is accessed, declared and named using identifiers, or simply a variable name. The variable name has to meet the following criteria.  
1. It should only consist alphanumeric characters and/or underscore.
2. It should only start with one of the alphabets or underscore.  
3. It should not be a reserved keyword in C++ like `int`, `goto`, `explicit`.  
4. It should not be the name of anything already defined before.  
## Data Types  
Now let us see data types. There are 3 types of data types in C++:  
### Primitive Data Types  
These data types are built-in and can be directly used to declare variables. This is the table of primitive data types in C++. (Note: The sizes many differ slightly, but they are very similar.)  
| Common Name | C++ Name | Size(bytes) | 
|-------------|----------|------|
| Signed Very Short Integer | signed char | 1 |  
| Signed Short Integer | short | 2 |  
| Signed Medium-length Integer | int or long | 4 |  
| Signed Long Integer | long long | 8 |  
| Unsigned Very Short Integer | unsigned char | 1 |  
| Unsigned Short Integer | unsigned short | 2 |  
| Unsigned Medium-length Integer | unsigned int or unsigned long | 4 |  
| Unsigned Long Integer | unsigned long long | 8 |  
| Decimal/Floating Point Single-precision | float | 4 |  
| Decimal/Floating Point Double-precision | double | 8 |  
| Decimal/Floating Point High-precision | long double | >8 |  
| Character | char | 1 |  
| Wide Character | wchar_t | 2 or 4 |  
| UTF-8 Character (C++20) | char8_t | 1 |  
| UTF-16 Character (C++20) | char16_t | 2 |  
| UTF-32 Character (C++20) | char32_t | 4 |  
| Boolean | bool | 1 |  
| Empty/Void | void | 0 |  
To variables of all these types, we declare them with the following.  
```c++
typename varname //= value;
```  
### Abstract Data Types  
1. Class: A class is the building block of object oriented programming. It can be defined either using `class` or `struct`, but `class` is prefered for object oriented programming while `struct` is prefered for C style structs. (more to be talked of later)  
2. Union: A union is a single block of memory in which all the members share the same memory. It is defined using `union` keyword. (more to be talked of later)  
3. Enumeration: An enumeration is used to accept certain values as some specific predefined names. It can be declared using `enum`, which is more type unsafe, or `enum class` or `enum struct` (C++11), both of which are very type safe. (more to be talked of later)  
4. Typedef: This method defines an alias to an existing type. There are 2 ways to do this.  
a. `typedef type alias;`  
b. `using alias = type;` (C++11)
### Derived Data Types  
These data types are derived from primitive data types. They are:  
1. Functions: A function is a block of code which is defined to perform a specific task. It takes arguments as values and performs computations on it.  
2. References: A reference is a variable which refers to the same chunk of memory as the variable it is assigned with.  
3. Pointers: A pointer is a variable which stores memory address. It is used in memory management, arrays and other dynamic data structures.  
4. Arrays: An array is a collection of items stored at continuous memory locations.  
