# Important Data Types in C++  
## Revision and Basics  
We know that we initialise a data type in C++ like  
<pre><em>typename identifier</em> = <em>value</em>;</pre>  
Their value can be changed later with  
<pre><em>identifier </em>=<em> newValue</em>;</pre> (Note: Whitespaces in operators are ignored in C++.)  
They can even be declared without assigning a value, and be later assigned to.  
<pre><em>typename identifier</em>;</pre>  
## Primitive Data Types  
### Integer Types  
Integer types can be assigned with any number as we write normally. For example,  
<pre>int x = 10;
uint16_t _short = 1234;
long x_long = 10;</pre>  
Instead of decimal literals, they can even be assigned to octal, hexadecimal or binary(C++14) literals. For example,  
<pre>int _1 = 0b101101000000;  // binary      (0b or 0B)
int _2 = 05500;           // octal       (0)
int _3 = 0xb40;           // hexadecimal (0x or 0X) (Note: Alphabets in hexadecimal literals are case-sensitive.)</pre>  
They can also be assigned with literal suffixes (C++11), usually for clarity and in some cases, a simpler alternative to typecasting(later). For example  
<pre>long variable = 12L</pre>  
u or U is the suffix for `unsigned int`, `unsigned long` or `unsigned long long`. l or L is used for `long` or `long long` or their unsigned variants. ll or LL is used for `long long` or its unsigned variant.  
### Decimal/Floating Point Types  
Floating point types `float`, `double` and `long double` can be assigned with any decimal point number, which are called floating point literals. Optionally they can also be assigned with hexadecimal literals.  
<pre>double x = 123.5 // 123.5
double _x = 1.e-5; // 0.00001 (= 1 * 10^-5)
float __x = 0x1.p-5f; // 0.00001 (= 1 * 10^-5)
long double ___x = 0x3.5fp0; // 3.37109 (= 3.37109 * 10^0 (i.e. 1))
</pre>  
There can also be an exponent i.e. power of 10 given to the number. In decimal literals it is completely optional, but e or E is used whenever required. In hexadecimal literals it is mandatory, maybe for lexing and parsing (f is a hex digit, which is also the symbol for floating point literal), and p or P is used (e is a hex digit). `float` literals use f or F and `long double` literals use l or L.  
### Character Types - 1 (`char` and `wchar_t`) (Traditional)  
`char` is the most popular character type in C and C++. It is sized 1 byte and is used to represent ASCII and to some extent, UTF-8 characters (though not UTF8 string literal, unless typecasted). It is assigned to like  
<pre>char x = 'x'; // ASCII character
// mind the single quotes, in C++ a character should always have single quote
</pre>  
`wchar_t` is another popular character type in C and C++. But it lacks a fixed size, and so is used with 2 different encodings, UTF-16 on Windows and UTF-32 on Linux and MacOS. one reason why there is no good practice in using it. Its literal is prefixed with `L`. It is assigned to like  
<pre>wchar_t x = L'H'; // again, mind the single quotes</pre>  
These both are very popular types for representing characters. But due to the variable size of `wchar_t`, it is rarely used. The only where `wchar_t` is used is in Win32 API, where there are functions using both these data types.  
For console output, `char` uses `std::cout` and `wchar_t` uses `std::wcout`. For console input, `char` uses `std::cin` and `wchar_t` uses `std::wcin`.  
For functions related to them and their respective string types, C++ either uses `cwchar` and `cstring` or the equivalent C headers `wchar.h` and `string.h`.  
### Character Types - 2 (`char8_t`, `char16_t` and `char32_t`) (Modern)  
Recently special types for unicode have also been standardised. All UTF8, UTF16 and UTF32 types are now available in C++ (and C) along with their literals.  
Examples:  
```c++
char8_t x = u8'x'; // UTF8, C++17 does not support this type. Use char instead.
char16_t y = u'x'; // UTF16
char32_t z = U'x'; // UTF32
```  
`char8_t` can be implicitly converted to `char` when passing as a function argument. For other conversions, there is `<codecvt>` header, which is deprecated but won't be removed any sooner until any good alternative is made available. These types can't be printed out directly without any conversion to `char` or `wchar_t`. The same rules for conversion apply to their respective string types. There are headers `uchar.h` and `cuchar` for thier support but they lack many of the required functions.  
## Others  
### String Types - 1 (C style)  
In C, strings are represented using arrays or pointers. It is usually a data type in the format `charType[n]` (array) or `charType *` or `const charType *` (pointer).  
```c++  
char x[] {"Hello World"};
const char* y {"รถ"}; // UTF-8 character
const char* z = strcat(x, y); // don't forget to put "#include <string.h>" at the top of the file to use this function
char y[] = {'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' ', 'W', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '\0'}; // or equivalent
// Note the null terminating character. It is used to mark the end of the string. Without that size of the string can not be measured.
```  
### String Types - 2 (C++ style)  
In C++, there is a string object type called `std::basic_string<charType>` where `charType` can be any character type. `std::string` is alias for the normal character string (i.e. `std::basic_string<char>`), `std::wstring` is for wide character string (i.e. `std::basic_string<wchar_t>` and the same pattern goes for the next string types), `std::u8string` is for UTF8 character string, `std::u16string` is for UTF16 character string and `std::u32string` is for UTF32  character string. The advantage of these strinfg types is that they can be assigned, concatenated and compared directly and many more functions are available for these types. Everything about strings will be discussed in a coming tutorial.
