# To choose a programming language and tool  
## General purpose GUI applicatiions  
### Windows  
For Windows, C#, Visual Basic and C++/CLI are programming languages built for the purpose. However, since the original API is written for C, even C and C++ can be used. The best option can be the native API for Windows, but MFC can also be used. For a compiler toolchain, MSVC possibly the best, because it is packed with tools and support as being the compiler and IDE with the purpose of making Windows applications. But MinGW can be an open source replacement. It is best downloaded as MinGW-w64 or MinGW-w64-UCRT through MSYS2 and it lets the use of GNU's tools for making Windows applications. Batch files can be used for build automation, as well as MSBuild when on MSVC and MinGW32 Makefiles when on MinGW.  
<sub>Note: Windows is now able to run Linux apps through Windows Subsystem for Linux. Console apps can be run directly. GUI apps can be run using tools like WSLg(not on Windows 10) or VcXSrv.<br>Windows can use X11 libraries through MSYS2 or Cygwin, which both ship with a Windows port to GCC compiler toolchain and GNU Binutils.<br>GNUStep can be installed to use Cocoa on Windows.</sub>  
### MacOS  
For MacOS, Objective C and Swift are programming languages built for the purpose. Swift, however, has poor compatibility with C code. And Objective C is less memory safe. C++ can still be used, but it is relatively difficult. The API for building applications on this pllatform is called Cocoa.  
<sub>Note: MacOS is unix based, but it is proprietary and its default user interface is less customisable, and it has a different look and feel altogether, so it is taken under a different section.<br>Alongside native applications, MacOS can also use X11 toolkit through XQuartz.</sub>  
### Unix Based (i.e. Linux (Ubuntu, Arch, Debian, Fedora, Mint, RHEL etc.), BSD (FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, DragonflyBSD etc.), Unix, OpenSolaris etc.)  
Linux has not made a separate programming language for its apps, but most developers prefer C or C++. For GUI applications, the native Wayland libries (for Wayland) and Xlib or XCB (for X11) can be used. But generally they are quite complex. So widget toolkits that are native to a few desktop environments GTK (native to GNOME, Cinnamon, Xfce etc.) or QT (native to KDE, LXQt etc.) or GNUStep (native to Backbone etc.) (in Objective C to use Cocoa on Linux) or Motif (native to a few Unix DEs) may be preferred for most applications. Shell scripts and Makefiles are popular scripts used for build automation.  
### Cross platform  
FOr cross platform applications there are many ways to make them. Usually C++ should be good, though. But there are many others too like Rust, Python etc. For a library, WxWidgets is one of the best cross platform ones, which has the speciality of using native widgets from the native toolkit on each platform (Windows API (Windows), GTK (Linux) and Cocoa (MacOS) active, Motif (Linux) active but deprecated, X11 (Linux), Universal (Linux) and Qt (Linux) in development). An alternative to this is Tk which too uses native widgets (Windows API (Windows), X11 (Linux) and Cocoa (MacOS)). Qt too may be a great choice which tries to look native by drawing all the widgets. CMake is possibly the build tool to be used since it supports transpiling to various types of build automation scripts.  
### Text User Interface  
For this C++ or Python are usually used. Ncurses is possibly the best library to go with.  
## Console applications  
These should possibly use C++, because it is extremely fast in terms of performance. Libraries like Crossline, Linenoise-ng may assist.
## Games  
For games, it is good to squeeze up all the performance. So C++ or Rust shall be good. But C++ may be better because it has a ton of libraries for it, and it has a properly designed object oriented paradigm. But somebody worrying about so called clean code may take Rust. For a rendering engine, pure OpenGL is excellent. SDL or SFML or Allegro can be used for 2D game development. For 3D games Irrlicht or Ogre may work well. If a game engine is needed, Godot (C++
, C#, GDScript), Unreal (C++), Unity (C#) or CryEngine (C++) may be good choices.
